Booktree learning how to learn

The Three Key Steps to
Powerful Reading
1. Picture walk - it give possibility to swich context between general to details view.
2. Read with care 25 mins
3. Use active recall

Chapter 1
Important! take notes,
answer questions, and make doodles with key
insights. to do a picture walk. And try to answer some of the endof-
chapter questions so you have a sense of
what you’re aiming at in your learning.

Chapter 2

Take some breakes 10 mins.

Focused Mode - when you are trying to learn
something new, you must first focus intently on it in order
to “turn on” those parts of the brain and get the learning
process started.

Diffuse mode - when your mind is relaxed and free.
The diffuse mode helps you make
imaginative connections between ideas. Creativity often seems
to pop out of using the diffuse mode.

If we want to shift from thinking about the details to thinking freely
about the bigger picture, we have to shift from focused to
diffuse mode.

CHAPTER 3

I’LL DO IT LATER,
HONEST!
Using a Tomato to Beat
Procrastination

1. Shut off all distractions—your phone, the TV, your
music, your brother
2. Set the timer for 25 minutes.* 
3. Get going, and focus on the task as well as you can.
Twenty-five minutes is not long. You can do it!
Just work as hard as you can for 25 minutes.
4. Now for the best part. After 25 minutes, reward
yourself.

Boost Your Reading Power with Active Recall !!!!!!!
Active recall means bringing an idea back to
mind. Actively recalling key ideas you are learning
has been shown to be a great way to understand
them

This is the critical part. Look away from the
page and see what you can recall. What are the
key ideas on the page? Play them back in your
mind. Or say them out loud to yourself. Do not
simply reread the page over and over again. And
don’t underline or highlight big amounts of text.

CHAPTER 4

We Love Metaphors!

1. I don’t have time.
If you don’t take the time to work problems
and read more slowly and carefully, you will
not be able to grow new neural connections—
which is the only way you learn. If you’ve
quickly run your eyes over the material in a
book, it’s still just lying there on the page. It’s
not in your brain. You haven’t learned it. This is
why you really need to focus while you’re
doing a Pomodoro, rereading if necessary. It
helps you make the best use of your valuable
time.

2. I don’t have a good imagination.
Creating metaphors and quirky pictures to
help you remember might sound difficult. You
may think that you don’t have the same
imagination that adults have. That’s not true!
The closer you are in years to your childhood,
the more imagination you naturally have. You
want to keep that childish imagination and
build on it by using your imagination to help
you learn.


Key Terms Related to
Neurons send signals that flow through your
brain. These signals are your thoughts.
Neurons have a distinctive look, almost like
space aliens. There are dendrites (“legs”) on
one side of the neuron and an axon (“arm”) on
the other.
Dendritic spines are like “toes” on a neuron’s
“legs.”
The axon of one neuron “shocks” a
dendritic spine on the next neuron. This is
how one neuron sends a signal to the next
neuron.
The word synapse refers to the special
narrow gap where the axon and the
dendritic spine are nearly touching one
another. A “spark” is sent from the axon to the
dendritic spine.
Metaphors are powerful learning tools.
They help us reuse neuron trails we have
already developed so that we can learn more
quickly.
If a metaphor is no longer useful, throw it
away and get a new one.
In our book, we point out that a set of brainlinks
(or mouse paths) can grow stronger in
two ways:
Each synapse gets bigger, so each
spark is stronger.
More neurons join in, so there are
more synapses.
You strengthen your brain-links (or mouse
paths) by practicing.
It’s easy to come up with excuses for why
good learning techniques aren’t for you. It’s
important to challenge these excuses.
Even kids who start out badly at school can
turn things around and end up being
successful. Remember Santiago Ramón y
Cajal, the father of modern neuroscience!

CHAPTER 6

Practise makes better understanding and long term memory.

CHAPTER 8

Nelson’s Five Tips for Remembering
Things

1. Focus—pay attention! Sounds obvious, but tell
yourself to focus. Tell yourself that what you’re about
to memorize is important. This helps a lot.
Concentrate as much as you can on what you are
working to remember. The more you practice
commanding your focus, the better you’ll get at
focusing!
2. Practice. Nelson says, “You don’t get good at
something unless you practice. That’s for anything in
the world.” So practice remembering things, whether
it’s facts about biology for school, to-do lists, or the
telephone numbers of your friends (you can amaze
them, since almost no one does this anymore).
3. Picture things. Your memory is a lot better for
pictures than it is for abstract facts. Turn whatever
you’re memorizing into a picture that you can
visualize in your mind’s eye. “Your brain soaks that
stuff right up,” says Nelson. If you add movement to
your picture, it makes the image even stickier. A
gorilla is one thing. A gorilla doing the tango is
another.

4. Store it. Find a way to relate the information to things
you already know. Find an anchor. This allows you to
put the pictures into your brain in places where you
can easily retrieve them. Even something as simple as
linking a new person’s name and look with someone
you already know is a good anchoring strategy. (His
name is Dan, like my uncle Dan, but he’s way
shorter.) There are other ways to store information so
it’s easy to grab from memory. We’ll describe some of
them later.
5. Recall. Recall. Recall. All the earlier steps in this list
get information easily into your head. But this last
active recall step, where you repeatedly bring the
information to mind, is what gets it safely stored in
long-term memory. You’ll have to recall frequently in
the beginning, but less and less often as time goes by.
Flash cards are valuable here. Quizlet is a popular
flash card app—it also has dictations, translations,
tests, and games.

a/ Make up SONGS about the information you want to
remember. Sometimes someone else has already done it
for you. If you Google “reactivity series song,” for
example, you will see that there are lots out there. (But
don’t sing them aloud during the test!)
b/ Make up METAPHORS for the information you’re trying to
remember. You know we love this. Think of similarities
between the object or idea you want to remember and
something you already know. You could try drawing it.
The picture below shows how chemical bonds for
benzene are like monkeys holding hands and tails.

c/ Take good notes. We’ll tell you more about this later,
but handwriting (not typing) notes about the material you
want to learn helps the information stick.

d/ Imagine you are the object or idea you’re trying to
remember and understand. !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
What’s it like to be a star?
Or a continent? Or a glacier? Or a tree growing in the
sunlight? This might sound silly, but it works! Do some
creative writing about the life cycle of an ant, or
whatever you’re learning.

e/ Some people find that associating numbers with wellknown
shapes or characters helps make the numbers
more friendly and real. The number “2,” for example, is
shaped like a swan, while “5” curves around like a little
snake. Giving personalities to numbers makes it easier to
create stories that help you remember the numbers. “52”
is easier to remember because it’s a snake hissing at a
swan

f/ Teach the information to someone else

Make your
mom or dad or friend sit down and listen to you explain
long-term and working memory. Refer to notes at first if
you need to. Then try without. Practicing recall is one of
the best ways of putting information into your brain. And
explaining to someone else is one of the best ways of
practicing recall.

g/ Don’t forget how important sleep is in anchoring these
new ideas you are learning!

h/ Learning Tip: The Rubber
Ducky Method

Line by line, they explain to the
rubber duck what their code is supposed to be
doing


SUMMING IT UP
Information is stored in memory as two types
—facts and pictures. Pictures are much easier
to remember.
Nelson Dellis’s five memory tips are:
1. Focus on what you’re trying to
remember.
2. Practice remembering.
3. Turn what you are trying to
remember into a picture.
4. Store the picture by connecting it to
things you already know.
5. Use active recall to make the idea
stick.
Memory palaces are useful, because they use
your amazing visuospatial powers. Practice
using your memory, and it will get easier and
easier.
Five other ways to help you remember are to:
1. Use a song.
2. Make up metaphors.
3. Take good notes, preferably
handwritten.
4. Imagine you are the thing you’re
trying to understand and remember.
5. Share your ideas. Teach them to
someone else.

CHECK YOUR
UNDERSTANDING
1. Is it possible to be able to develop a good
memory even if you’ve always had a bad
memory? If so, how?
2. Explain the memory palace technique.
3. Explain the differences between the two
ways we store information in long-term
memory.
4. Turning a fact into a picture makes the fact
easier to remember. What can you do with
the picture to make it stick even better in
memory? Give an example.
(When you’re done, you can compare your
